The world in words is made possible on top of the National Endowment for the
Humanities celebrating fifty years of excellence.
Tim Smart is a bridge. He lives in middle England really right in
the middle of England
nearly It's a small town called Dunstable it's got a main street or a high street.
As it's called that full of those little stores that used to exist in Main Street America.
Tim owns one of those stores and just in case you're thinking this sounds a
little too twee and old fashioned I should say the name of the store
is Secrets. It's an adult entertainment
store twenty two
years an eternity. Now back in the old days about fifteen years ago
things were pretty stable pretty
serene more recently the shops on the street and the street itself.
It's changed the whole area has over the last three four five years something like
that what's changed. Tim says it's
foreigners
foreigners have come to live in Dunstable from all sorts of countries like Turkey.
We would have to question the town. We just had in a Turkish restaurant I'm
fantastic let's be fair we will have a problem food meeting but
in my case. And of course along with the restaurants and their foreign owners have come
their families families of foreigners a lot of the families are obviously
speaking tonight is tongue. Tim knows that these foreigners the kids especially he
knows that they pose an economic threat to the
locals if they will who might be in the native tongue and then you're into an English school year in
English if they then apply for a job for any supermarket or any position
anywhere who would usually somebody speaks to language was someone who speaks one
language in case you didn't catch that Tim is asking rhetorically he's asking
whether the children of low. Foreigners who've been schooled in English and so
now speak two languages. He's asking now he's suggesting
that they are more
employable than monolingual Brits. And for Tim This hits
close to
home but deuce is just a ploy for a job with a safe look at Mitchell
names so Tim's daughter speaker of English only finds herself at a
disadvantage losing out to a bilingual
foreigner and in Tim's mind this is because the British government has an open door
policy when it comes to foreigners settling in Britain and being told
English is not a level playing field demoralise Tim's right. It isn't a
level playing field. If you speak more than one language.
You may well have an economic edge. His solution is to pull the country out of the
European Union and stop the free flow of people across European
borders. It's not quite the same here in the U.S. but there are parallels. There's
plenty of anger the way letting too many foreigners in and then
educating their
children at taxpayers' expense and that one day. That'll come back to bite us.
That's certainly what tym things in his small Middle English town. He just sees
it through the prism of language. If you stop immigrants from coming. You can
keep the country monolingual and that way no one will have
to buy
language
is this
some fringe opinion. Maybe maybe not. We'll find out
more of the Brits vote this June on whether to leave the E.U. a British exit
a Breck's
it. Many of those who want to leave say it's because they want to regain
quote control of immigration. Maybe regain control of good
old British monolingualism to.
Today we're going to a few places where people are taking very different tones places
where people a working. Bilingual ledge Hawaii the
Netherlands as the two of them. The third is closer to
home now language acquisition whether it's for monolingual multilingual speakers.
It's something we're understanding more and more about seems like every few months.
There's a new study out on this. Here's a recent
one baby talk patens give a clue into early language
acquisition children use previous vocabulary
to help learn new words that's the headline and the kids in that study they were
all of two years old I can beat that Patrick. This is Ari Daniel He's a
reporter with the big show aka the world public radio program and also the public T.V.
show Nova. And yes it's true. Ari can be
me I can go much younger. He's talking here about studies of language
acquisition it actually starts way or earlier than we ever thought and
researchers are learning more by looking not just at the sounds we make but at a language
is rhythm and pitch is well you ready. Go for it. OK
So Patrick I want you to go back to when you were a kid
and listen to
this
know everybody needs a good day.
Yes I recognize I think American listeners will too because this is
an Australian sun right. You know neighbor. Yes it played in
the United Kingdom. I don't I don't think it ever played over here right.
Not one of my favorites I have to
say Joe
resoldered
where in the late eighty's a British psychologist published a
study showing that pregnant moms who watch Neighbors every day gave birth
to babies who reacted more strongly to the theme song than those whose moms didn't
watch the
show that the first paper which has shown that fetuses can be exposed.
Two specific type of signs and then elicit some sort of reaction to them after they have been
born a no part and is a Finnish neuroscientist at or whose University
Hospital in
Denmark pardon and wasn't involved in the soap opera study but it's inspired a bunch of
his work including a cool thing he and his colleagues tried a few years ago while in Finland.
They took a group of pregnant moms and for fifteen minutes a day five days a week during
their last trimester. He asked them to play this loud but up up
up up up up up up. Wow. It doesn't sound like a Finnish music hit.
And there are sadly even some things that would be annoying. How do you find moms that want to do
that through friends and relatives who don't
have to say no.
Mostly plus through internet discussion boards and occasionally in the recording the
middle syllable of the Ta ta sequence would be swapped out for a different
vowel thought that that thought up up up up up up up up.
Really are is is there a difference that.
Yeah. It goes. Tut tut tut tut toto a listen one more
time thought that that thought up. OK I hear that but it's
really thoughtful just just the middle settle right.
Right and pardon and did one other thing with the middle syllable. Sometimes he changed its
pitch but up up up up up up up up up up up and then just days
after they were born Parton played the stimuli to the newborns and used in the IGI
to monitor their brain activity. He compared it to a group of newborns who didn't receive
the in utero Ta-Ta stimulation.
The results couldn't be clearer both groups of babies responded identically to
the sequence with the different vowel.
But that up brought up because that second vowels heard all the time in finish. You don't
need a special recording to be exposed to it as a fetus. But only the
babies who had been exposed in utero to the pitch change but that
the. But UP UP UP UP UP UP UP UP recognize it once they're
born and that's because just as an English pitch isn't relevant in Finnish compared
to some languages Chinese for example where words take on different meanings based
on
pitch. So babies that don't hear different pitches in utero don't respond to them
later or more simply babies respond to the signals they first hear in utero.
And of course these signals can come from one language or many
languages the way I think of the early development is the female fades build
up specific predisposition to the what we are going to experience later on
after being born babies on a born as a blank
slate rather a kind of groundwork. Gets laid in utero that
familiarizes us with the world we're about to encounter and if that world has more than one language.
We also prep for that in
utero a lot of language crosses to uterine wall and so the by the time with babies
foreign they're not an inexperienced listener.
Janet Werker is a developmental psychologist at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver.
It's a very multi-lingual city. We have babies growing up in all sorts
of combinations of
languages including bilingual homes where English and Filipino are spoken two
languages with different spoken rhythms and worker wanted to know whether
babies exposed to English and Filipino in utero are familiar with both languages
at
birth and whether they can differentiate between them. She and her colleagues work with newborn
several hours to several days old. Granted it's a tricky population.
They don't talk yet and they don't point they don't follow
instructions so she wired a pressure sensor up to a
pacifier babies will change their rate of sucking their strength
of sucking and you can condition the sucking
reflex which is to say that how much a baby sucks. Or how strongly that baby
socks can tell you how familiar and interesting something is to the baby like these.
Awful speech samples that worker played filter to sound like they would in the
womb. This is
English
and this is
Filipino the results from
the moment a newborn baby is
born who is growing up in a bilingual environment they listen.
Preferentially to speakers of either of the languages they heard in utero. And
they're able to track the rhythmical properties of each so they're born
ready to learn to mind witches and not confuse
the worker says all this learning before birth might be useful. First it may
allow babies to identify who is part of their community once they're
born and second just from rhythm cues babies may be able to track how
certain words function and give them a head start on learning that language. All
this might come in handy when considering early interventions for things like dyslexia.
These are still
hypotheses so worker appreciates a more concrete and intimate lesson one
she's learned by watching the parents watching their babies in an experiment like
this it communicates to the parent that their baby is interested in the world
around them and is interested in learning from the first moments of
life and we like to think that this might make them treat their baby as
this curious involved little being that they
are OK I get it. Newborns. They may seem kind of
unformed they can't do very much but then be full of there's a ton going
on and even before that even before they're born language is such
an irresistible force to us it finds its way into the womb
and it makes connections not just in the baby's brain but also between
the baby inside and the world outside.
Yeah and then in one or several languages right. And whether. One or more
appears to really
affect how the brain functions. Yes OK Ari. So my kids who
you've met and played charades you know it's a good time she's bilingual English and
Chinese should I know would myself a gold star for that does she
have what some people call the bilingual
edge. You know I asked Janet Werker about this in particular
and you know I said Does raising a kid in a bilingual environment give
that kid some advantage and she said that yes there are certain advantages like in
the realm of what's called executive function the ability to switch between different
tasks but on the other hand. Janet Werker told me that
often a bilingual kid will have a smaller vocabulary in each language than
a monolingual kid. Unless the bilingual kid is a really avid reader and then they can kind of make
up for
it so there are differences growing up monolingual versus bilingual It's not like
one is better than the
other the key is that babies adapt to the language environment that they're
in when they're born and even before so doing well in the world really
starts with doing well in the
womb already done you. He's a science reporter here in Boston he works at the big
show and Nova the public T.V. science show he is also hands down
the world's best rights play. This being a pole cause to know you just have to trust me on
that well Nina politically and me. We've been thinking a lot
about bilingualism recently. It's like the reason that was in the pod cause last week was because we were both
on the road talking to people about just that at the start of the week we talk to each
other
to Hi Nina. I hate Thatcher.
We were speaking on the phone here but each of us recorded ourselves so hey presto. It sounded
like we were in the same room.
Nina though was in Hawaii and I was in the Netherlands because it was
the very first time that both of us were away from home base on palled business at the
same time. Well a phone call was in order a phone call
across eleven time zones my evening. Nina's morning.
Even though she didn't have to leave the US. It took her much longer to get to
her destination.
I got here yesterday afternoon it's such a blur Actually I
kind of walked around I walk to the beach and then went and had some
like noodles and basically then passed out. I'd like to have it.
When did you get there.
Well I got here around about the same time that you did except it was eleven
hours before so I also got her yesterday afternoon but I've had a
whole extra day on the I've been out reporting all day today.
The Dutch province where I was is called Friesland I know it sounds like a made
up name and the people there they speak Friesian I know I
know but it's true. I knew virtually nothing about the Friesian language
before I started researching the story.
My first port of call this morning was a tri lingual school. Which is a totally
awesome thing in and of itself. So yeah this was a like a middle
school so Friesian
English that untouched Yeah. So they would learn you know part of the day in each language so
you know they'd learn geography in English
and History in Friesian and then they do math. I think they do math
in a very kind of reminds me of dual immersion in back in the United States
where you know my
daughter is learning some of her math and civics in
Chinese right now and then in England I wish she does for the other half of the
day English writing skills and I think they're doing some kind of like playing but
our science and stuff like
that so they have textbooks in these different subjects in Frege Yeah
yeah all of the curriculum in Friesian someone had to go through and translate all that was that's
pretty impressive.
Yeah there's only about three hundred thousand free agents. Because well I say only Actually that's quite a lot I think
it's a little bit more three hundred sixty something like that I realize that's more than the entire
population of Iceland. There's more people speaking Friesian. In the world than speaking
Icelandic I
mean that's crass interest and. Well I came across I mean the thing that's interesting
about Hawaii or. If you want to say it right is that in
languages nearly everywhere like everybody says certain token phrases like Aloha
Mahalo
like hello and thank you and immediately when I got off the plane there's all these different.
Hawaiian sayings in Hawaiian written all over the place but it is of far
fewer like actual fluent
speakers in the thousands. It's like sort of ubiquitous it's all over
like Hawaiian language you can feel it everywhere it influences like I was listening to
N.P.R. this morning the Hawaiian local station and even I was just curious the way that they
say all the islands in the way that they say all the place
names is definitely they say it in a why in a way but the actual language itself
is severely endangered. So it's kind of interesting that it's sort of all around and
sort of not here at the same
time. I think that region is almost the opposite of that it's so interesting that we're at
these two different. Sort of ends of the world and we're seeing things really differently.
So with the Friesian zits
like yes you hear the language all over the place because people are speaking it everywhere especially once you
leave the city and you're in the small villages but you don't see bilingual
street signs you don't get the sense that you're in a bilingual part
of Europe. Like if you're
in the Basque Country or Switzerland or you know one of these places
where there's more than one language. At play.
You see the signs everywhere that let it be known to you that. More than one language and
they're being taken very seriously by the authorities because they got these signs up everywhere. You know see that
here. It's all in Dutch Arsalan
Friesian Yeah exactly it's all in one or the other. So somehow someone decided.
Several decades ago that the city was where Dutch because.
And the
villages and the farming communities where the Friesian speakers are so if you're
going to a village you see all the signs are in Friesian here in the city all the signs
are in touch.
But let me know when I was at the school this morning I got followed
by a
T.V. crew. Well I had yeah it was a Freemason language T.V. crew and they made a
story out of like B.B.C. America reporter which is how they describe
me doing a story on Friesian Is there a lot of Friesian
language media yeah yeah yeah there
is a public broadcaster that you know has a news service and
clearly occasionally a scraping the barrel for stories to report
on and there's also freezing language radio interesting Lee with
the newspapers there are two newspapers but they're both Dutch
language kind of like the written language often defaults to Dutch which
is greatly to the annoyance of some Friesian
speakers there was a newspaper reporter and a photographer also showed up and asked me questions.
What happens with that I have no idea it was like a news conference.
What were they asking a Patrick like why do you care about this my anguish or what
were they. Yeah. Why do you care about language and you know I was likeable I'm here to
find out I was unable to tell them very much taller. So yeah it's
weird I'm I'm all over Friesian T.V..
Famous for making the news while making the news but I'm not. I
can't claim to have gone to the beach or eaten noodles or anything fun
like well not yet you know you'll get your get your time to get
my sitting here like actually looking at the waves hitting the shores
of Calliope. I think I got the better day I don't know.
Nina. Felicity who one day will return from Hawaii. Maybe she's
still staring at those white.
You know I'm sure she'll come back with a great story about the wise attempts to
go bilingual attempts that maybe one day will be as successful as those
present all of which let's make the man from the start of this podcast episode
of him the Brit must make him totally mad people all over the
world then making his beloved monolingual playing field a
little less
level and that is it for this book because we
have photos videos link all of that at P.R.I. dot org
slash language you can also get there by the world and was a page on Facebook or Twitter
at lingo POG please write us a review at i Tunes or wherever you listen.
It really helps to get the word out. Thank
you and the last piece of business is yes the accent of the National Endowment for
the Humanities fund. It's coming up again. Let us know your guess at our website
or on social media. You can even email that address is language at P
R I dot org. Thanks for listening and to
unite the world in words is made possible on top of the
National Endowment for the
Humanities celebrating fifty years of excellence.
Sound work and sound works from
P.R.I..